# Transfiguration and decoding

### Definition of analog: 
- phisical matter, commonly electric signals, used to represent some sort of data in a continous, infinite manner between devices. Data can be represented by a wide variety of ways like: wavelength, length of a continious signal, voltage, or even pressure. 
---

### Definition of digital 
- the data is represented strictly in numerical form, which is decoded and encoded between computers, commonly transported via electrical, or optical form.
---

### Difference between digital and analog signal:
- ##### way of storage 
	-  digital data can be stored with many 1 and 0, analog data cannot be stored only converted into digital, and stored as digital.

- ##### way of transporting 
	- analog data can be transported in a wide variety of creative ways, due to it's phisical nature.)

- ##### way the signal is displayed 
	- humans have a very hard time reading base 2 data, due to it's length, but analog signal can more easily be represented by, for example: waves, mathematical graphs, and many more.
---

### Converting analog signal into digital (in steps)
### (1<sup>st</sup>)  Sample extraction \ sampling
- in given instances taking a sample from the signal using different instruments, and storing this data in some way, usually in numerical form.
- some sampling techinques: 
	- natural sampling (keeps the natural shape of the signal)
	- flat top sampling (easier to implement, most common technique, not as accurate)
	- ideal sampling (very detailed, the sampling frequency is very large, but is hard to implement, and is processing heavy)

### (2<sup>nd</sup>)  Quantization 
- the stored signal has to be rounded, simplified, and compressed, for easier and practical storage.

### (3<sup>rd</sup>)  Encoding 
- transforming the simplified data into binary data (stored as bytes), this process varies quite a bit, and is done with varrying techniques for the most optimal proccessing for the specific tasks.
- **Laws of sampling**: According to the Nyquist-Shannon theorem, the sampling rate must be at least 2 times the highest frequency contained in the signal. 
	- Example in the real world: the human ear can only hear at max around 20k hz, and the sampling rate for audio in 	microphones is usually at least 44k hz, but usually more, thus for the human hearing sound can be digitized without any humanly precivable dataloss.
- **Sound, image, and video digitalization**
	- The scanner or camera, breaks down the incoming light into matrixes, and assings a color value to each and every pixel, and in advanced cameras additional data like color depth among many other things.
	- This raw data is then processed and stored.
	- Basic image types: Binary image, Black and white, 8-64 bit color format (color values assigned as rgb value (each color with a 0 to 255 value for each color red green blue. for example. (0, 77, 255) )
	- Digitized images are stored as a count of pixels, called resolution.
	
- **Sound digitalization:** 
	The job of digitalization is the work of the **ADC module** (analog to digital converter module) found on all soundcards, and the playing of the audio is the job of the **DAC module** (digital to analog converter module). 
	The ADC samples the signal, quantitaizes it, as a count of hertz, and encodes it, and the DAC does the same but in reverse, which must be done because speakers are playing analog signal, while computers need digital signal, so this main conversions is always needed.

- **video digitalization**
	- video digitalization by nature is very similar to image digitalization difference being, while an image is one single image needed to be digitized, in video thousands upon thousands of images need to be digitized and then indexed in a way that a computer knows which one should be played after another image, and in what speed (for example 30 or 60 times per second.)
	
Instruments of digitalization: scanner, digitalization table, cameras, video cameras, microphones, and many more.

Data as in informatics.
data in computers is strictly used as digital, binary form.
binary form is represented as ones and zeroes. the digital datas, smallest unit is 1 byte which consists of 8 bits and grows in 1024 intervals to kilobyte, megabyte, gigabyte etc. as 1 megabyte is 1024 kilobytes and so on. 
	The binary data is transported, as electrical or optical shortburted signals, for example in electricity ones an zeros can be represented as changes in voltages, higher voltage 1 lower voltage 0.
	1 byte can be represented as the variations of 2^1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 which will be the sum of the mentioned 1024
we can represent these integers with prefixes like - and +
or with prefix we can repsent numbers from -128 to +128 on 1 byte
and without prefix, we can from 0 to 255 on 1 byte.

In binary form characters can be represented in bytes in for example ASCII or unicode table.

Charactersets: 
	CCITT (the first ever set, can represent 32 different character)
	ASCII (American standard code for information interchange) is the english ABC letter + most common characters
	UNIOCODE first 128 value which is the same as ASCII but on 16 bits, around 100K karakters (2^31) 
	UTF-8 (8 bit unicode transformation format),
	
digital images:
	Formatted in different file types, which have different characteristics, and is optimized for different things like size, image quality, proccessing diffuculty, etc.
	JPEG 
	PNG
	TIFF
	RAW and many more

Digital audio: (basically works the same as images but for audio, and is each type is used for different optimalizations)
	formats: 
	FLAC
	WAV 
	MP3
	AAC and many more